Is AI going to make human labor
obsolete? Right now, the loudest voices
on both sides of the AI jobs debate are
in hysterics. On the one hand, you've
got doomers who are convinced we're a
couple of years away from near universal
unemployment.
>> Over a 5-year period, it could wipe out
half of white collar entrylevel jobs.
Unemployment could spike to 10 to 20% in
the next 5 years. So, we're looking at a
world where we have levels of
unemployment we never seen before.
>> On the other hand, you've got people who
think AI is an overblown hype that won't
fundamentally transform the economy.
>> Sam has been telling us we know how to
build AGI for years. This just isn't
AGI. We're not going to get to AGI next
year. Probably not going to, you know,
save as much money for various
workplaces as as we thought.
>> The truth is both perspectives are
flawed. All the best indicators we have
from history, industry, and common sense
suggest AI is going to transform the
economy, but not destroy it. Let me
explain why.
I want to begin by telling you the
strange story of radiologists. Back in
2016, Jeffrey Hinton, a touring award
winner and one of the godfathers of AI,
declared that people should stop
training radiologists. Now,
>> it's just completely obvious that within
5 years, um, deep learning is going to
do better than radiologists. Students
going to be able to get a lot more
experience.
>> Hinton is one of the pioneers of neural
nets, someone who understood better than
almost anyone else what the emerging
technology was capable of. But he was
wrong. Almost 10 years later, demand for
radiologists hasn't gone to zero. It's
actually at an all-time high. This is
despite the launch of dozens of new
state-of-the-art AI products that can
detect and classify hundreds of diseases
faster and more accurately than humans.
What explains that? Well, there are a
few reasons that are specific to the
medical industry, like malpractice
concerns and insurance regulation that
requires humans in the loop. But more
fundamentally, it turns out that when we
gave radiologists the tools that sped up
one aspect of their job, demand for
their services actually exploded.
Cheaper scans means more scans and more
scans means more demand for complex
diagnosis and treatment planning from
radiologists. In other words, when we
use technology to push down the cost of
using a resource, in this case MRIs and
other imaging techniques, demand for
this resource and the services
associated with it skyrocketed. This is
what economists call Jevans paradox.
Jevans paradox was first proposed in
England in the mid 19th century when the
economist William Stanley Jevans
observed that technological improvements
that increased the efficiency of using
coal increased coal consumption across
many industries. This ran contrary to
the assumption of many at the time that
increased efficiency would lower
consumption. In fact, what Jevans showed
was it can just as often reveal latent
demand. And this new demand in turn can
create entirely new categories of work.
There are lots of historical examples of
this. When containerization made
shipping 90% cheaper in the 1960s, some
dock workers were initially laid off.
But global trade exploded and this led
to the rise of billiondoll empires in
freight forwarding, logistics, and
warehouse distribution. Similarly, when
cloud computing made infrastructure 10x
cheaper in the 2010s, traditional IT
roles transformed. Server admins became
DevOps engineers and cloud architects,
managing infrastructure at scales that
previously would have seemed impossible.
And most recently, as algorithmic
improvements have pushed down the cost
of inference, demand for GPUs has
skyrocketed, not cratered. Nvidia stock
recently hit an all-time high. So, what
does this mean for how we should think
about how AI will affect our labor
economy? Well, as Aaron Levy, the CEO
and co-founder of Box, recently wrote,
"We should expect that efficiency
increases will actually mean more, not
less. Demand for services in a bunch of
fields." As Aaron writes, "When the cost
of doing work goes down, the demand for
it goes up. And usually there's a far
more pent-up demand than we realize." In
other words, as AI makes it cheaper,
faster, and easier to do things like
analyze MRIs, draft legal documents, and
write code, we should expect that the
demand for radiologists treatment plans,
lawyers counsel, and engineers expertise
will broadly increase, not decrease.
This doesn't mean jobs aren't going to
change and in some cases disappear in
the future. Many roles that might have
previously involved manual human
involvement will probably look more like
supervising teams of agents. Humans will
still be in the loop. Andre Karpathy,
one of the co-founders of OpenAI, had a
similar take. Karpathy argues that AI
will first transform jobs that are
wrote, require little context, and are
forgiving of mistakes. Things like
customer service agents and data entry.
But even then, he thinks many of these
jobs will be refactored into manager or
supervisor roles rather than
disappearing entirely. We're already
seeing this in our companies at YC.
AOKA, which is an AI powered sales agent
for service-based industries like
plumbing and HVAC, is freeing up
customer service agents to do higher
value work. Tenor, which is automating
the flow of paperwork between health
care providers, is transforming admin
roles from data entry to patient care
coordination and complex case
management. Often these are horribly
boring rote jobs that suddenly can be a
lot more interesting when you're manning
an army of AI agents. Lots of the tasks
AI is automating for these employees,
like dealing with impatient customers or
filling out routine forms are
unenjoyable. And though some of these
jobs will disappear, as with the
internet, we can expect generally more
engaging ones will take their place. So,
if you're thinking about starting a
startup with AI, what should your
takeaway from all of this be? First, the
AI transformation is absolutely real and
advancing as we speak. Don't be like
Paul Krugman who compared the impact of
the internet to a fax machine in 1998.
Don't underestimate that change. Second,
this isn't the time to indulge in
fantasies about fully automated luxury
communism or the imminent collapse of
the entire human economy. Don't just sit
on your couch waiting for a UBI check.
AI is the next thing as big as if not
bigger than the internet itself. The
future that you're going to build isn't
waiting for a permission slip to start.
It's being built right now by people who
see things that other people don't, just
like you. Every great company starts
with a founder who decides to take that
leap and bet on their conviction. The
only real question is whether you'll be
one of them. Thanks for watching and
we'll see you next time.